all right good afternoon thanks for
joining me today
my name is dave kellogg i'm a principal
of my own consulting firm
i'm the author of a blog called kel blog
and
as we announced a couple of weeks ago
i'm starting up in assignment as a eir
and executive in residence at uh
balderton capital uh a european-based vc
firm uh based in london
so today's presentation is a ceo's guide
to marketing
so so let's jump in
and talk about the founder experience
and
you know most founders the story goes
something like this that they're they're
working one day and they see this kind
of unserved need in the marketplace
and they think i'm going to build a
product
to fill that need
and they get a team together and they
build a product and congratulations it
works
and things are going well
and many years later they've built a
successful sas business
maybe on a sunday night they're looking
at their p l
and they notice something funny
they say wait a minute i'm spending
twice as much
on sales and marketing as i do on r d i
thought i founded a product company
and they think well maybe maybe i'm
abnormal
right maybe those silver tongue folks in
sales talked me into spending too much
money or those crazy marketers that
waste half the budget are wasting more
than half maybe i'm abnormal
so we go to meritech public comps
and we start comparing ourselves to
others
and we find out now wait a minute i am
normal
the median enterprise sas company spends
twice as much on sales and marketing as
it does in r d
sure you have folks like datadog that
only spend as much on sales and
marketing as r d but that's literally
the 90th percentile
9 out of 10 sas companies spend more on
sales and marketing than r d
50 percent of sas companies spend more
than double on sales and marketing than
r d
and it only goes up from there right if
you look at some of the names up there
kind of surprisingly folks like
smartsheet and hubspot are coming in at
2-2 and 2-4
well salesforce they're a marketing
juggernaut what do they spend well they
spend three times as much on sales and
marketing as they do on r d
zoom four times as much although off
really small numbers
monday.com the work os aren't they kind
of a plg company product led growth
doesn't the product kind of sell itself
well they spend five times as much on
sales and marketing as they do with r d
so in my opinion the founder experience
that happens a lot is you found a
product company and one day you wake up
and you're running a distribution
company
and you go what happened
and you say it's okay i'm gonna be all
right because this sales thing
i don't know exactly how it works
but it's super measurable quota
performance customer success
that's pretty straightforward we know
what they do
we can measure it through renewals and
churn
or as we talked about last year net
dollar retention
the market
there's this thing called marketing and
i'll tell you what's the scariest thing
a ceo can hear at a qbr
the marketing sessions up next right
now why is that right i've been i've
been 25 years in the business probably
literally a hundred different qbr's
why is the marketing session always so
scary
right well think about it what's the
session most likely to take more than
double it's a lot of time slot
marketing
right what's the session most likely to
leave people dazed and confused at the
end of it
marketing what's the session most likely
to generate a knock down drag out fight
marketing right what's the session where
people's careers can literally be ended
like i've been in qbr's where after this
session i said
i don't know what that was but but but
that can't happen again right we need to
get a new head of marketing literally so
the question is why is the marketing
session so scary
and the answer particularly for product
oriented founders and executives is
first it's unfamiliar territory most
founders didn't grow up in marketing
second you get overwhelmed by a blizzard
of buzzwords and acronyms you know them
as well as i do
marketing people love them you're buried
in the sea of numbers conversion rates
and funnels and web traffic and clicks
you're confused by ill-defined
terminology and process most marketers
are not that rigorous in their thinking
and you're drawn into conflict between
sales and marketing
right so this is why the marketing
session is so scary and the other reason
is maybe just maybe
you're a little afraid to admit
that you don't understand all this stuff
right and that makes it even harder so
what do you do well you do what any good
ceo would do you wait for the session to
end and then you say with trepidation
well that was great
next session
and you continue to leave you continue
to leave a life of quiet marketing
desperation right you don't understand
it the session is terrible and and you
just say it is what it is and i'm here
to help change that today so i'm going
to be your marketing guide for the rest
of this session my name is dave i bring
a perspective that comes from three
places one i've been a cmo for 10 years
at companies with as little as 1 million
in revenue and as big as a billion
dollars in revenue so i've been a cmo
across a broad range of sizes
i've been a ceo in the zero to 100
million dollar range again for combined
more than 10 years
and i've been combined well more than 10
years experience
serving as independent director on
startup boards so hopefully i'll be able
to bring you this kind of marketing
rooted but ceo vision ceo viewpoint
on marketing
so
and the way i'm going to do that is
we're going to talk about five things
that every ceo should know about
marketing and it's important that this
is not a generic marketing 101 course
this is not just some quick survey
course on marketing this is rooted in my
experience working with startups so it's
biased towards the mistakes i see people
make and the challenges that i think
they face
so that's where i'm coming from and
these are the five things i think ceos
and c-level execs need to understand
about marketing to work effectively with
marketing
now there's two underlying themes in
this one is
use market research
in this day and age we have so much data
from our systems that there's a tendency
to only want to analyze that data
and back before we had these systems we
used to rely on market research and now
we almost don't
and the problem with only relying on our
data is it's kind of naval gazing right
we're only analyzing that portion of the
market that founded into our crm
so one underlying theme i'll give you
numerous examples is here's a question
you should use market research to go
figure out
the other underlying theme is keep it
simple
don't get sucked into the complexity
stay high level so i'm going to give you
some high level models that you need to
come back to that if your marketing
person is kind of pulling you down in
the details you can step back and pull
things right back up
so let's jump in here are five
principles the first one is that you can
reverse engineer
all of marketing
from buyer empathy right if we just
think about the buyer and we think about
what marketing is trying to do we kind
of figure out marketing's job
and
in effect you can derive marketing from
these two things if i only knew two
things i could derive marketing one the
state of mind of the buyer in terms of
what question they're trying to answer
and in my mind there's two fundamental
questions why buy mine or why buy one
and and why by mine is kind of
exemplified by southwest's bags fly free
right bags fly free answers the question
why should i buy a ticket on southwest
it doesn't answer the question why i
should go see my uncle in toledo right
it does say if i'm going to see my uncle
in toledo why should i use southwest
because bags fly free right that is a
differentiation message
the other state of mind the buyer can be
in
is a value message which is why should i
buy one at all and for early stage
startups this is often what you face
you've made the first thing
and they don't know whether they should
buy one and in that case you need to
sell value right here's the value of the
thing i exemplify this with a old
campbell soup campaign called soup is
good food right here's why you should
buy soup because soup is good food it
will make you healthy bags fly free
versus soup is good food so answer
incorrectly at your peril
right just say i work with a company
called elation they sell data catalogs
and say when you listen to the gong
calls which i recommend that everyone do
the whole e-staff as a group should do
it once a week and you listen to gong
calls are you hearing things like
i'm going to buy a data catalog
i called up gartner and they said to
evaluate you and competitor b and c and
i'd like to know why i should buy
yours if you're hearing that
and your salesperson gets on the phone
and goes i've just been to value selling
i know that people buy solutions to
business problems let me tell you why
you should buy a data catalog
what's going to happen
the customers would be like do you have
like stuff in your ears i just told you
i've already decided to buy a data
catalog i want you to tell me why i
should buy yours and you're telling me
why i should buy a data catalog you're
not listening to me
right so don't get these things wrong
and the easiest way to figure out what
situation you're in is listen to gone
calls
market research can help
also just looking at category formation
if the category hasn't formed yet you're
probably in a why by one mode hey i know
there's a thing you never heard of let
me tell you why i should buy one
if there is a category and there's five
vendors in it and there's a magic
quadrant you're probably in a why by
mine mode
right and the buyer is probably trying
to figure out which one to buy
so that's the first question we can
derive marketing from understanding
where the the question in the buyer's
mind
the second is the consideration level of
the purchase
and i put this one in because there's
some things two things confuse it one is
plg
and the other is lazy marketers
um and the concept of marketing is
simple we have two types of purchases
low consideration and high consideration
low consideration you're checking out
the supermarket you see that pack of gum
you grab it and throw it on the conveyor
belt
right that's a low consideration
purchase you didn't think much about it
buying a car is a high consideration
purchase right you might spend weeks
thinking about it comparing models going
to consumer reports right you put a lot
of energy in now you might think that
price is the only factor that drives
consideration level
but it's not how about you want to buy
tires for that car and you're going to
put your whole family in that car and
drive to lake tahoe in the snow
is that high consideration or low
consideration they're only a thousand
dollars
ah it's high consideration right because
you're putting your family in potential
peril driving on those tires so we need
to understand
which question the buyer is trying to
answer and then how much energy they're
putting into getting that answer because
lazy marketing people will tell you the
following
no one has time to read these days
we should only make short content
nothing should be longer than a
paragraph everything should be short
and that's wrong
because if this is a high consideration
purchase right if i'm betting say i'm
buying a financial planning system and
i'm gonna i'm gonna bet the year's
financial plan on it i'm going to get
all kinds of managers through the
company to use it i have to set it up i
don't care how much it costs to buy the
cost of owning it and deploying it is
high and if it fails i look bad
that's a high consideration purchase so
we have to understand how important the
purchase is the buyer plg confuses this
that little trial of a collaboration
system with three people in your
department that might be low
consideration it's free who cares if it
works no harm done
to deploy that same software package to
a thousand people in your engineering
organization that's high consideration
right so we need to understand first
consideration level varies and second to
quote one of my favorite traditional
marketers david ogilvy long copy sells
right and nobody says this anymore these
days but the fact of the matter is if
you're talking to your buyer and it's a
high consideration purchase they will
have time to read a 12-page white paper
they will have time to go to a one-hour
demo
right instead a lazy marketer who
doesn't understand this will be saying
no the demo has to be 20 minutes the
white paper has to be a two-page e-book
right so the action here that i
recommend is one make sure your
marketing is thinking about this issue
produce a mix of long and short tools
and if you're an early stage startup
write what i call the seminal white
paper which tells your story and eight
to twelve pages to your buyer they will
have time to read it if you're thinking
about the right buyer and almost nobody
does this the best one i've seen lately
is from a friend of mine who runs a
company called skyflow and i suggested i
suggested this idea to him and he wrote
a banging white paper
you can get it off their website i think
it's gated
so those are the actions there
the other way to look at this is just
imagine you were the buyer
where would you go for information what
process would you use
who would you want to speak to as
references important point the answer is
always people like me
so the question is what's like you mean
your industry your company size your age
your seniority
your risk tolerance and profile right
people want references who remind them
of themselves so this is a large part of
the whole crossing the chasm book is you
can't take a you know technology pioneer
and reference them against the
pragmatist it doesn't work
what process would you use to make the
final decision
and what criteria would you make the
final decision so to me you don't have
to just imagine this you could ask
customers about it
i think you know if we have 60 minutes
with a customer we spend all 60 talking
about their problem and our solution
i'd actually say to carve off eight to
ten at the end to say that was great can
i talk to you about how you buy this
stuff how do you think about this
purchase process it's gonna make me more
effective it's gonna help my company and
ask them these questions to understand
how they think about the buying process
not just about buying your software
so that's our first point we can reverse
engineer marketing from buyer empathy
the second point is that marketing is
all about funnels
and this to me is the only funnel you
need to know there's a lot of funnels
out there we'll talk about some of them
but this is the one i always come back
to when things get confusing
awareness consideration trial purchase
have you heard of a product
yeah i've heard of a ferrari i've heard
of a subaru i've heard of a buick
have you considered buying one
no i've not considered buying a ferrari
why they're too expensive and i don't
fit in them okay have you considered
buying a subaru
no not too much i mean i would have have
you tried driving a subaru well no
actually because you know what happened
when i was making that purchase
i didn't have time to test drive every
car so i decided to test drive three and
i tried the bmw the mercedes and the
volvo
so i i was aware of subaru i'd
considered buying a subaru but did i try
one no
right and this this is it are you aware
have you considered buying and those are
the reasons why you may or may not
consider buying
have you tried it right how easy in
software example is it easy to use your
trial right do i have a free download or
a free trial does it take a lot of time
to set up do i have to speak to a
salesperson
big impediment usually and if i do do
they call me back promptly even bigger
right so and then finally did you
purchase and if you didn't did you buy a
competitor
did you did you just defer the whole
thing and stick with the status quo so i
was looking at buying a financial
planning system i considered buying
three vendors i tried two of them in the
end i stuck with excel
and again gonna be a continued theme you
can and should use market research to
understand this funnel you can't find
this funnel in your crm it's not there
right because it's a lot of people who
never made it to you all the people who
never heard of you all the people who
never considered you won't be there
so that's the first funnel come back to
that when things are confusing if you go
to a qbr
this is the funnel you're more likely to
see marketing will present the funnel on
the left web traffic names responses to
campaigns leads marketing qualified
leads
sales will present the funnel on the
right sals sequels
i did a blog on this but i always call
sals s1s and sequels s2s and i use as my
definition the safe deposit box two keys
have to turn if a bdr or sdr thinks it's
an opportunity they turn their key if a
quoted sales person thinks it's an
opportunity they turn their key so you
have to turn two keys to get into the
pipeline um which is appropriate if you
think about how valuable the pipeline is
it needs to be protected by two keys so
sales and sequels we talk about
conversion rates from there solution fit
demo which i hate as a stage but a lot
of people use it so i put it up there
vendor of choice legal one you're gonna
see these funnels the mistake i see
people make is they forget about these
funnels which is in reality you have
four pipeline sources in your business
marketing which gets a lot of attention
sdr outbound which you should be using
in a named account strategy alliances
which can easily account for 10 to 30
percent of your pipeline usually that
closes
faster and with a higher rate
and then sales outbound with a targeted
strategy so the first mistake i see
people make is they forget to think of
all four funnels and they forget to
allocate a target and a target not for
arr pipeline dollars but a target for
opportunity count to each of those
pipeline sources
now to me the best practice here is that
marketing should be the quarterback of
the pipeline because if you think about
those four funnels the only person they
all report to is the ceo
so either you're gonna be the
quarterback of the pipeline or you're
gonna delegate it to somebody who
doesn't run all four
i think you should delegate it to the
cmo and say i know you're only one of
those four sources
but i want you to make sure that we
start every quarter with enough pipeline
coverage so i want you forecasting
pipeline coverage i don't want to wake
up on the first day of the quarter and
go oh my god we don't have enough
pipeline
right i want you to forecast a quarter
in advance or more if we're going to
start next quarter with enough pipeline
coverage and i want you to work with the
other four sources to make sure we have
enough if we don't
and you're the quarterback of the
pipeline
so and in general
look for these rates mql to s1 5 to 10
percent s1 to s2 60 to 80
stage 2 to close
10 maybe but 15 to 25 percent those are
all
and the ranges can be much broader these
are only rough benchmarks but these are
sample rates for these rates
now as soon as we talk about funnels
that leads to models and we can build
these amazing models where we have sales
bookings capacity that starts with
hiring and a rep ramp an attrition that
generates a booking's capacity number
that we shave to get the plan number for
new arr maybe i'll cut 20 percent of
that off to account for expansion so
that i get a new logo ar target i divide
that by an asp to get the number of
deals i need 21.3 i phase shifted three
quarters to say if i need 21 deals now i
need 107 stage two opportunities three
quarters prior and then i said well if i
need 171 stage 207 stage two is that i
need 1641 mqls a quarter before that
right we could build this awesome model
they're all over my blog i love these
models
but don't ever forget reality
which is that's not how people buy
enterprise software flat full stop
period no
right
and this is gartner's buying models for
enterprise software it'll be 15 contacts
four roles nurturing people across two
different companies across two years
well i used to work at company and i
moved to company b
um right enterprise software buying
cycles are complex
and the question is what what do we
think about all that the answer is
pretty simple this quote all models are
wrong
but some are useful right
and and that's the way i think about
this of course that model's wrong should
i not build it because it's wrong in my
opinion no you should build it anyway
but you should understand its
limitations
so we need to use models as guiding
abstractions
we need to use them as tools of
enlightenment not oppression i think the
number one mistake i've seen founders
make is they hold people's feet to the
fire on all those cells and i think
that's wrong i think it's demotivating i
think it it doesn't reflect an
understanding of the fact that the model
deviates from reality people don't like
it so i think as ceo you should hold
people accountable for the two things
that matter pipeline coverage
basically are we giving ourselves a
chance to hit the number because if we
don't have pipeline coverage we're not
giving ourselves a chance and then
actual sales did we hit the number
that's it those are the only two things
that matter everything else in the model
is just helping to guide us
so i'm going to skip the pro tips for
now but i have two actions i suggest
strongly on this which is
because often particularly product
oriented founders are very quantitative
people they kind of fall in love with
these models and they get kind of model
myopia and they start using them as
tools of oppression everybody hates the
models and they forget the reality of
the underlying business because the
model's so simple and so clear
the way to solve that is two things one
quarterly win loss analysis at your qbr
right hire a third party firm to analyze
wins and losses to bring reality back
into the room and second this is done
far less often but i think even more
important a win touch analysis take
three to four deals you closed last
quarter and have marketing present every
single touch made over the last several
years and when you're done with that
you're gonna be like oh my god that
model i mean it's useful for making the
budget but it's so far from reality
right so it kind of keeps you humble it
keeps you grounded in reality
so about messaging now so we're
three-fifths of the way through
messaging is a term marketers use all
the time
and i want you to think of messaging
simply as a structured fact so a
frequently asked questions document
and it's just simply standard
answers to commonly asked questions they
teach journalists in journalism school
that for any story it's about 5w plus 2h
right who what where when why are the
5ws how and how much of the 2hs
i add a third h for how different
because in tech differentiation matters
so much like so it's not just enough to
have the 5w plus 2h we should also have
the how is this different from the other
people doing it
so your messaging should address for a
product launch for a company
announcement it should address all those
things and that's not to say you can't
tell stories as part of those answers
because i'm a big believer in
storytelling but still the story is in
response to a question
now messaging should be simple you
should be able to tell your story on a
paper tablecloth that's my test whenever
i test people on messaging i never do it
with a deck i do it on either a
whiteboard or a tablecloth and i start
asking them questions about the company
and i want them drawing pictures on on
the tablecloth because i want the
messaging in their head
because it has to be simple
right and i like the message to be black
and white particularly when we're on
offense we want to be black and white
only we have this
when we're on defense we want gray
right well you of consolidation well
they have consolidation you don't well
actually we just introduced a
consolidation module last week it's kind
of thin but but it's out there and when
you do that all of a sudden you've taken
the other guy's black and white claim
and made it gray
and now they're obliged to explain why
they're better which is hard right
black and white is much easier than gray
the other thing about messaging is you
got to follow the rule of threes which
is the answer to every question is three
points this is well known i do have my
own little spin on it which is what if
you have more than three things to say
what do you do then
how do we how do we build messaging that
we can remember
that we have more than three things to
say example this is an approximation of
relations messaging alation's a leader
in data intelligence
and this is not their exact messaging
but it approximates it
what makes elation different from its
competitors well three things glad you
asked three things intelligence
collaboration and guided navigation i
can remember that i could let the
customer pull the thread what do you
mean by intelligence glad you asked i
mean we have query log ingestion we have
a behavioral analysis engine we have
expert identification and for each of
those features i should be able to do
feature benefit right i won't do it now
for time but when i name a feature i
should instantly be able to go
expert identification is great because
it helps you identify the right people
to govern your data which means your
data governance program will be
successful
right i can go feature benefit for each
of those
the other fun thing i could do the same
thing for collaboration and the same
thing for guided navigation here's a
demo hey only we have guided navigation
we have an intelligent query editor that
features real time suggestions so it
helps you build your query and in real
time it's suggesting where you should go
to find the answer you want and it's got
inbuilt data governance it will
literally guide you towards thing you're
supposed to use and guide you away from
things you're not that's interesting
tell me about real-time suggestions glad
you asked three things
it could suggest tables joins or filters
i got 27 things now i got a two-level
ternary tree right i can pack 27 things
into this right so this is the key to
building simple memorable messaging i
still i launched business objects
version 6 in 1996 i still remember the
messaging pde
why because it's a ternary tree
right so i firmly firmly recommend using
ternary trees to structure complex
messages
finally last thing you need to know
about marketing
relates to hiring your next cmo
because cmos last one and a half two two
and a half years you're going to be
hiring one soon
whether you just hired one or not
and the number one mistake i see people
make in cmo searches is you get down to
the last three candidates which is when
they call me they say hey dave we've got
three candidates love you to meet all
three of them i say great and i meet the
three of them and i go
apple pear orange
they're completely different you're a
demand gen person you're a product
marketing person and you're an sdr
leader or a comms person or a brand
person apple pear orange and i say how
is it that we ran this process and we
paid a recruiting from a hundred
thousand dollars and we're at the end of
it and we have one apple one pair of
them on orange right and you may not
want to admit to yourself that you do
this because a lot of people are in
denial um but that's wrong if you get to
that place you screwed up
right because you never at the start of
the search said we need an apple for a
head of marketing or we needed a pair
for ahead of marketing or we needed an
orange for our head of marketing and at
the end i had three oranges
and then i got to pick the best orange
right what do i mean by that marketing
people come in different flavors you can
think of marketing as having four
pillars product marketing launch
messaging content demand gen digital
programs events marketing comps pr
stories and brand sales development
inbound up on hybrid note the rule of
threes apply to the pillars by the way
so in any case marketing pillar well
there's four pillars but sometimes
there's only three
sometimes sdrs work in sales uh but at
least each pillar has three sub points
um
and the issue here is marketing people
like they don't make five five any
there's nobody who's a 5-5
god doesn't make them right you either
grew up in product marketing or you grew
up in demand generation right you also
don't get 20 pointers
i think 15 is the maximum number of
points you can get on this scale so the
first thing you have to do is be
realistic and say what does the market
have to offer me
and you only get 15 points across the
four pillars and then you need to decide
what you want and then go tell the
search firm and then find three of them
and that's the way to avoid ending up
with a search that results in you on the
last day of the search deciding whether
you need somebody stronger at demand
gender product marketing which is really
not a good place to be you don't want to
be there personally i'm a 5352
i think it's very not only i mean god
doesn't make five fives i'm not sure he
or she made maybe five fours or four
fives right
those first two pillars it tends to be
five three or three five there aren't
many people who can honestly say i'm a
four four or four five
so think about the pillars you can map
your candidates out like this you can
just put the four pillars up there and
put each candidate's score
and in this case i think we need to
restart the search
because the first bar is what we're
looking for and nobody really
approximates it
so those are pillar profiles so to wrap
this thing up odds are you're spending
double on sales and marketing as you are
in r d
welcome to running a distribution
business
distributions about sales success and
marketing
marketing does not need to strike fear
into the hearts of you and the e-team by
the way great marketing people make it
easy they love to teach marketing bad
ones observate and if you remember these
five things it'll be
much easier for you to work with your
marketers going forward first reverse
engineer marketing for buyer empathy
second marketing is all about funnels
third marking use models as guiding
abstractions fourth messaging is a
structured fact and five use this notion
of pillars to hire your next cmo
so thanks very much i'll post the slides
on my blog and thanks for attending the
session
[Music]
you